I need to get a job, right? So I went to apply at the
telephone company because at the time the
telephone company was hiring people. And, you
know, you went through all this bunch of testing
and stuff that they did. And we had to figure out how
to add one plus one and all that kind of stuff. And,
you know, all this kind of rinkity testing that
they did. And then I got to see an interviewer. And
his interviewer basically told me that he was
going to conduct this interview because he had to,
but that I wasn't going to get hired because I was a
Vietnam veteran and that they wouldn't hire
Vietnam veterans because they were afraid that we
were going to run amok and kill people. Well, that
didn't sit real well. I thought, do what? You know,
so there was a lot of, I don't think the public
reaction to us was very favorable. And we couldn't
understand that. That was one of the biggest
problems that came about with, is that every other
war, American soldiers were the pride of their
country. And here we were like the ugly red-headed
stepchild. You know, nobody wanted us. We were
lepers, you know. And we felt like, you know, why
were we lepers? You know, we had done what you
asked. You know, we went and fought in a war we
didn't even believe in. We died. Or we came home,
shot all the pieces, and you still treat us like
we're trash. And I can understand to some extent
some of the people's disillusionment and some of
their anger. But, you know, a lot of... I'll tell
you what it's like. It's kind of like you see a guy
that... He commits a crime, and he's an ex-police
officer. He may have been a police officer 25 years
ago, but it will always read, ex-cop does this.
It's always, too. Vietnam was 20 years ago, right?
It'll read, vet does this. I mean, you're always
stigmatized. It's the same with being an
American. If you come from another country to
America and you're Chinese, after a period of time
here, you're an American. But you can go from
America to any other country in the world and you
will always be an American. No matter how long you
live there, you will always be an American. You can
become a citizen there if you want, but you will
always be a American. Same way. Ex-Vietnam
veteran, runs amok, kills 35 women and children,
takes bus, has hand grenades, you know, whatever.
But it will always be not that Joe Smith did this,
but ex-Vietnam vet. Okay? Now, that doesn't
justify it in my mind. Like what Barrett says in his
book about... Another book that was written
called Charlie Company that I suspect that a lot of
people that came back with problems had problems
when they went over. You know, and that they used
the war as their own crutch. You know, people were
prone to doing that. And that's, you know, they,
you know, I got my mind messed up because I was in
Vietnam and all wrong. Your mind was messed up when
you went there, you know. or people that, I know
some people today, 20 years later, okay, that, in
fact, my brother-in-law is one, okay, that you
say, can I talk to you about Vietnam? I don't want to
talk about Vietnam. That's a very personal thing,
you know. Oh, man, get serious. You know, it's
over. The war is over. It's passed. It's not
something you're proud of. It's not something
you're particularly ashamed of either. But if
it's that personal with you, I think there's
something wrong with you to start with. I've heard
some vets say, though, that they wanted to talk
about it to their close friends and their close
friends didn't want to hear anything about it,
wanted to ignore it totally and pretend that
nothing had happened. That's true. I know some
people that that's true. I went and I was in college
when I went to Vietnam. My problem was that most of
my friends went to Vietnam and got killed, and so
there weren't too many people to talk about it. But
a lot of people that you still knew, that when you
came back to the university or something, that
were your friends and stuff. They didn't want to
talk to you. They didn't want to be seen with a
Vietnam vet. Or they were just uncomfortable.
They didn't know how to deal. Because the burning
question in everybody's mind was always, how many
people did he kill? Did he kill women and children?
This is a friend of mine. Was he one of those guys
that bayoneted little babies? And they didn't
know how to ask you that.
They knew they couldn't ask you that, but they knew
they needed to know, and they were uncomfortable.
So they just kind of, if I stay away from them
altogether, I won't have to face that issue. You'd
be surprised, even today, people will come up and
say, were you in Vietnam? Yeah. Next question, how
many people did you kill? That's like, how many
times have you beat your wife? I mean, you're
guilty by association, you know. What do you feel
is the most important thing that you've learned
from your experience and how has it most affected
your life? How has it most affected my life? What
have I learned from my experience? I learned to
stay alive.
What have I learned?
I don't know that really I learned much other than
not to just believe every word that pours out of the
mouth of government. In fact, I probably learned
to be quite the opposite side, to disbelieve most
everything they say, which might or might not be a
real healthy thing.
I learned, too, that other people have different
ways, and that doesn't make them any better or any
worse than me. It just makes them different from
me. But that we still share the common denominator
of being people. I learned that I basically have
learned that the American military could
probably blow this planet to pieces if it wasn't
held in check and that we really should keep an eye
on that. I've learned that war is not the way to
solve a problem.
I have seen in my lifetime, and in fact in the class
that we're in, Some of the people that we have there
almost feel like they were unlucky because they
weren't born at a time when they could go test their
notions of democracy or something. And I've
learned that the worst way of solving anything is
to fight in war.
that we've got to find a better way. We just have got
to find a better way. And basically I've learned
the biggest thing is that I just don't trust
government at all. That's what my experience
taught me. How has it affected my life? Well, it's
obviously affected it in those areas. I don't
trust government. I've also learned probably,
though, that if this is truly a government for the
people and all that, that them to prevent that from
happening again is that you have got to get out
there and take part of it right or wrong you know
you've got to get out there and do your part you know
to uh to keep it from happening again hopefully
okay why do you think that we lost Why did we lose?
Because we didn't win.
We lost because we didn't understand that we
couldn't win. We lost because we had a notion of a
limited war. We lost because we had a notion of
American invincibility. We lost because we think
that we have... the locks on the moral game, that we
had this mission to spread democracy and
capitalism throughout the world. We lost because
we were basically naive and stupid about the other
peoples of the world. We lost because we didn't
understand that Ho Chi Minh's nationalism and Ho
Chi Minh himself and his charisma was far stronger
in Vietnam than our military.
We lost because we didn't understand that the
Vietnamese people were just tired of fighting and
that they weren't going to fight. They knew that
the French had been defeated. They knew that we
ultimately would be defeated. They didn't want to
get in there and fight and die for no reason. They
just were tired. All they wanted to do was
basically the same thing, stay out of the way until
the war was over, and then they could go on about
doing their lives and their things. And they would
just try to stay out of the way. They saw no real need
to fight. It's
just a totally different culture. We lost because
we didn't understand the culture. Another reason
we lost is because we think we lost. We think we
lost. We never lost a battle. Militarily, we never
lost a battle in Vietnam. We won every engagement
that we were ever in. Insofar as the numbers game,
we lost 57,000 something, 58,000 soldiers. We
killed over a million people. Those are some real
odds. We lost because we perceive it to be a loss.
And I suspect that the reason for that is, as I was
reading Stanley Carnell's book, that he comes up
with a kind of a unique definition of war, I
thought, was that defeat is when stated
objectives are not achieved. Okay? Well, our
stated objective was to make South Vietnam a free
government like the United States, and it didn't
happen. So we perceive it as a loss. Militarily, we
were not defeated. Militarily, in fact, we
probably would have won had we have really stayed
with it. But we lost because we thought we lost. We
defeated ourselves. Do you feel that we've
learned from our mistakes? No. No, I don't. And the
people at large, I don't think that we've learned.
I see the American notion of exceptionalism
creeping back in. Even
before that. I think it probably came about during
Jimmy Carter's administration that everybody
else kind of thinks that I'm crazy. But I saw the
human rights issue, the United States doing its
moral stumping again. And it doesn't appear to me
to be very long after the United States does its
moral stumping that it does its political
stumping and its military stumping. I have a total
different view over the Reagan administration
than most people did. I think that Reagan's an
actor. Okay, apparently he's very good, should
have won an Academy Award if he didn't. I don't know
whether he did or not, but I think that Reagan was
one of those people that you called like dumb like a
fox. Okay, I think that Reagan was a hell of a lot
smarter than we give him credit for. I think that he
built up the military and spent so many dollars in
the military and so much money in the one area that
the United States cannot be beaten in, the area of
technology development. No one has ever been able
to beat us, even the Japanese. The Japanese don't
come up with the technology. They buy it from us,
and then they just make millions of things cheaper
than we can make them, but they can't develop the
technology. We do. Reagan knew that SDI was a
technological wonder or would be. He painted that
picture, this big technological thing. And that
left it kind of open-ended as to how much it was
going to cost. It was like a blank check. And what
that told the Soviets were that they're 10 years
behind us in technology, that they were going to
have to spend at least as much, and probably more,
because they've got to catch up on 10 years. And
their economy was shot. Reagan knew it, and so he
actually forced them to bargain. I would defend
that on the argument that all Mikhail Gorbachev
has asked for is get rid of SDI, cut military. All he
wants to do is not have to expend the money on his
military because it's going to kill his country,
and he knows it. His domestic economy is in such a
shambles because they've drawn so much money into
their military. And that's all he wants, to get rid
of this SDI notion. And so I think that Reagan was
quite right in that negotiate through strength.
Now, it's also a real gutty proposal. If it blows up
in your face, your whole world blows up. But I think
it was probably a good poker game. And I feel like
Reagan would have really backed down, had it
looked like we were going to have another Cuban
Missile Crisis type event. that you don't know
whether tomorrow you're going to wake up or be
bombed into the Stone Age. I think Reagan would
have backed down. I think he played a good bluff and
he won.
American moralism is still, I think, rampant
throughout the world.
All right, do we understand peoples of other
cultures? No. Find me somebody in the world that
doesn't want to go bomb the Ayatollah into the
Stone Age or bomb Muammar Gaddafi into the Stone
Age.
Forget about the fact that the Shah of Iran was one
of the most horrible dictators in Iran and had a
secret police that just, you know, did away with
political dissidents. We forget about that part,
the Shah. Now, I don't particularly like the Shah
either, but, you know, I mean, we still have this,
you know, real view of American exceptionalism
and American moralism that we're right and nobody
else in the world is. in the way that we treat the
Soviet Union. That we're going to tie aid to
countries, especially the Soviet Union. We want
Mikhail to win. We want his country to become
democratized. But he's got to do certain things in
order to... The notion is that we tie our aid to
certain... Why do we do that to Mexico when we give
aid to them? Well, I've heard the statement, no,
but Mexico is not the adversary that the Soviet
Union is. I make the statement that we really don't
have much choice. What's the alternative? A
U.S.-Soviet confrontation? Nobody's going to
win out of that. No, I don't think we've learned
anything. At the time, I think we probably, and for
a few years after, were convinced that...
You know, that America was not invincible, but I
think we're coming back to that notion here in the
last few years. You know, and I worry about it. You
know, I don't want my children to have to go up and,
you know, that's a lot of money raising these kids.
And I don't want my children to have to go out and,
you know, raise them and then have them die off in a
war that whether it's right or wrong, you know. I
mean, I want like every other parent. I want them to
grow up and be happy and wealthy and have a bunch of
kids and enjoy life and enjoy their country. I
don't like the prospects of it not being that way.
Well, I guess you have anything else to add? That's
it. Thank you. You bet.